---
layout: post
title: flash captivate with serendipity 6.4 rom
date: '2011-05-23T18:37:17+00:00'
tags:
- anroid
- custom rom
- serendipity
- captivate
tumblr_url: http://userdel.com/post/5786975951/flash-captivate-with-serendipity-64-rom
---
This is a guide to flashing your Samsung Captivate with the Serendipity Custom ROM.  The Serendipity website lists some instructions but if your a total newbie to flashing your phone (like I was) you’re going to run into some issues as it’s not completely detailed.  I’d recommend first opening the instructions above, looking them over, and then checking my notes below to fill in the gaps.  This guide assumes you’re on the latest 2.2 official ROM.
First get Titanium Backup from the market (paid version is worth it!), or use your favorite backup app, and take a full backup of your phone.  Export your contacts or make sure everything is in your Google/Corporate/other account.  If you want to backup your text messages you’ll need another app like SMS Backup (haven’t tried this but I’ve seen others recommend it).  For a decent backup guide checkout this post.  If you use Titanium make sure you move the Titanium folder off your phone before proceeding!
Next you need to revert back to the 2.1 stock ROM.  You do this by using a tool called Odin.  Get the drivers and tool by reading the first post in this thread.
Install the drivers and get ready to wipe your phone.  After this all your data will be gone so be sure you’re ready to proceed.  This is the part where I had problems so read carefully.  Turn your phone off and remove the battery, SIM card, and SD card.  Plug your USB cable into your phone and PC and open the Odin utility.  Put the battery back in and while holding down the Volume Up and Down keys push the power button until the phone turns on.  Keep holding down the Volume Up and Down keys and wait.  You should see your phone enter “Recovery Mode” keep holding them down though until you see it go into “Download Mode” (screen is totally different with a big yellow Android digging).  If your phone does not enter Download Mode and just stays in Recovery Mode try booting it back up normally and enable USB Debugging in the Applications settings menu and then try again following the steps exactly detailed.
Now that your in Download Mode you should see your phone and PC start talking (i.e. loading drivers) and Odin should identify that your phone is connected (you will see one of the boxes populate with something like “COM:4”).  Once Odin sees your phone click the Start button.  You should see some scrolling text in Odin and on your phone as well.  You should also see a progress bar.  Wait until it finishes and reboots into the stock 2.1 ROM.
Once your in the fresh 2.1 ROM disconnect the USB cable and close Odin.  Go back into settings and enable the USB Debugging Mode again.  Fire Odin back up and connect the USB cable again.  Odin should again detect the phone and then you can use Master Clear.  This wipes everything on the internal storage so again be sure you backed everything up first.  If you have an external SD card in as well it might wipe that too, so if you put that back in for some reason take it back out just in case.  The Master Clear will take a few minutes to complete and phone will again reboot when finished.  Don’t worry about the Odin progress bar never finishing completely; once it reboots it’s wiped.
Now you need to download Clockwork Mod Recovery which is a replacement recovery console for your phone.  This is what will allow you to actually load the Serendipity (or any other) custom ROM.  You may as well grab the Serendipity ROM as well so you don’t have boot back into stock 2.1 just to put it on the phone and reboot again.  Put both files (do not rename either one) on the root of the phones internal storage.  Turn the phone off.
Now you need to boot into Recovery Mode.  Again hold Volume Up and Down and then push the power button.  When you see the boot screen you can let go and you should end up in Recovery Mode.  If not try again and hold down for just a bit longer.
Now use the Volume Down button to go down to where it says “reinstall packages” and then hit the Power Button.  You should see text start scrolling for Clockwork Mod Recovery to get loaded.  If not then you did not put the update.zip downloaded in step 6 on the root of your internal storage.  If successful your phone will reboot and you will be back at the Recovery Mode.  Now you need to repeat this process and again choose “reinstall packages”.  This time it should install real quick and then Recovery Mode will change a bit and say “Clockwork Mod Recovery” at the time with several more options and a different colored theme.
Now it’s time to actually flash Serendipity on to your phone!  Choose “install zip from sdcard” and follow the menu to browse to “Serendipity_6.4.zip” and install it.  Like the other installs you will see it scroll and install.  This will take several minutes and your phone will eventually reboot into the fantastic Serendipity UI.  After that you can turn it off and put your SIM and SD card back in.  
Restore any apps you’d like (don’t restore any system data!) and enjoy your new and (greatly) improved Captivate!
I was amazed at how much better the phone performed overall with Serendipity installed.  It just feels like it responds so much better now.  Big thanks to the creators!
